TODO update

# DAT516 / DAT515 Python LP2
## Useful Logistic Information for Lab 1 Submission

- shortcut to the [canvas page](https://chalmers.instructure.com/courses/31748)
- shortcut to the [coding information for this lab](https://github.com/aarneranta/chalmers-advanced-python/tree/main/labs/lab1)

### Step 1: Joining the Classroom

1. Accept the invitation to join the classroom.
2. Add your lab partners to your team: Settings > Manage Access > Direct Access. Click on the name on your team and then Add a member. Everyone at the team would have access to all repositories that are created in the team, so adding members should be done only once
3. A private repository will be created for you in GitHub Classroom, which includes the following items:
   - Two input files in data/tramlines.txt and data/tramstops.json.
   - A template (tramdata.py) with the functions you need to implement and their related arguments. Please do not modify any function or argument names in the template.
   - A test file (test_tramdata.py) where you need to implement your own tests.
   - A test file (lab1_student_test.py) that you should not modify and can help to check your code.

### Step 2: Implementing Your Solution

1. Implement your solution in the tramdata.py file.
2. You can add your own "helper / extra" functions if needed.

### Step 3: Uploading Your Work

1. After completing your implementation, you must upload the following files to your repository:
   - tramdata.py
   - tramnetwork.json (generated by your code with tramdata.py init)
   - test_tramdata.py (which is different from lab1_student_test.py)
2. Go back on Canvas and copy and paste the link of your repository in the lab 1 assignment and please specify your [lab group number](https://chalmers.instructure.com/courses/31748/groups#tab-17684) - [link to the Canvas assignment](https://chalmers.instructure.com/courses/31748/assignments/95096)

### Step 4: Checking Test Results

1. `lab1_student_test.py` is a subset of the solutions, you can place it in the same folder where you have your codes for this lab (locally on your own computer) and run it to verify your implementation

Please keep in mind:

- The `lab1_student_test.py` is not exhaustive, so it's possible to achieve a 100% score and still have some errors in your code. The test is intended to provide you with an idea of the correctness of your solution.
- It's important not to modify the function names and argument names provided in tramdata.py. Part of the goal for this course is learning how to work with and read documentation effectively.
