labs/lab2/lab2.md, before:

# Lab2: Graphs and transport networks

Advanced Python Course, Chalmers DAT515, 2021

by Aarne Ranta

DRAFT, TO BE FINALIZED 18 November 2021

## Purpose

The purpose of this lab is to build a system of classes and algorithms for graphs.
The intended application is transport networks, which will be built on top of the graph classes.
But the graphs can be applied in many other ways as well, as will be shown in exercises and extra labs.

The main learning outcomes are:

- Python's data model for classes
- class definitions with private instance variables, public methods, and "hidden" methods
- inheritance between classes
- representations of graphs
- Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm with different cost functions
- visualization of graphs and paths in them, the ``graphviz`` library
- property-based testing with randomized input data, the ``hypothesis`` library


### Bonus points

If you implement graphs and Dijkstra's algorithms from scratch, you can get 4 bonus points on top of the normal 10 points.
But if you want to save work, you can use the ['networkx`] library.
This will require some code to be written, but less than in the implementation from scratch.
Details will be given below.



## The task: file `graphs.py`

### The Graph class

The class `Graph` can be initialized in two ways:

- from `None` (the default)
- from a list of edges

The class builds internally a data structure that supports different graph operations.
This data structure is kept hidden, and we leave it to everyone to choose among the various equivalent representations.
The public methods to be implemented are:

- `neighbors(vertex)`
- `vertices()`
- `edges()` (only given in one direction for undirected graphs)
- `__len__()`, the number of vertices
- `add_vertex(vertex)`
- `add_edge(vertex, vertex)` 
- `remove_vertex(vertex)` (also removing the edges with this vertex)
- `remove_edge(vertex, vertex)`
- `get_vertex_value(vertex)`
- `set_vertex_value(vertex)`

If you have read an earlier draft of this document, you may notice that we have simplified the specification a bit:

- we only deal with undirected graphs
- we have fewer arguments in initialization 


#### Baseline solution, no bonus points

The simplest way to implement graphs is by inheriting from `networkx.Graph`:
```
    class Graph(nx.Graph):
        def __init__(self, start=None):
            super().__init__(start)
```
The internal representation is inherited from `nx.Graph`, so you don't need to define any hidden variables.

Some of the public methods also exist in `nx.Graph` with exactly the same names.
They need not be defined in your class, since they are inherited.
Some other methods have different names, so that to implement the desired API, you have to write, for example,
```
        def vertices(self):
            return self.nodes()
```
The trickiest part is perhaps the values of vertices.
In `networkx`,  they are stored in dictionaries associated with the vertices themselves.
Here is a minimal example suggesting how you could do to set and get values of nodes:
```
    >>> G = nx.Graph()
    >>> G.add_node(9)
    >>> G.nodes[9]['location'] = 234
    >>> G.nodes[9]
    {'location': 234}
```

#### Native implementation, gives bonus points

If you write a native implementation without using `networkx` (or any other libraries), you need to

- design an internal representation, stored in private instance variables (such as `_adjacencylist`),
- define all the public methods as specified above.


#### Testing your graph implementation

We recommend the use of `hypothesis` in the way specified in the lecture notes, Section 5.9.

A particularly powerful way of testing is available for your native implementation if you also implement the one using `networkx`.
Then you can systematically compare the results of all the public methods.



### The WeightedGraph class

`WeightedGraph` is a subclass of `Graph`, which stores **edge weights**.
These weights can be objects of any type.
The class stores weights internally (e.g. in a dictionary) and supports two public methods:

- `get_weight(vertex, vertex)`
- `set_weight(vertex, vertex, weight)`

If you have chosen the `networkx` implementation of graphs, you can implement these methods by using the representation of weights that is already available:
```
    >>> G = nx.Graph()
    >>> G.add_edge(1,2)
    >>> G[1][2]['weight'] = 8
    >>> G[1][2]['weight']
    8
```
If you use a native implementation, the simplest solution is probably to have a separate dictionary.


### The shortest path algorithm

The function
```
    dijkstra(graph, source, cost=lambda u,v: 1)
```
computes the shortest path from `source` vertex to all other vertices, as a dictionary.
What is shortest is calculated by the minimum sum of ``cost`` function applied to each step on the path.
For example, if `graph` is a `WeightedGraph`, its ``get_weight()`` method can be used.


#### Baseline: Networkx implementation

The [`networkx` implementation](https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.shortest_paths.generic.shortest_path.html#networkx.algorithms.shortest_paths.generic.shortest_path) of Dijkstra's algorithm is the function
```
    shortest_path(graph, source=None, target=None, weight=None, method='dijkstra')
```
which you can call in your own `dijkstra` function.
To do so, you

- pass the `graph` and `source` arguments to `nx.shortest_path`,
- leave out the `target`, which causes the function to produce a dictionary for all targets,
- convert the `cost` function to a `weight` attribute,
- leave out the `method`, so that the default is used.

The tricky part is the conversion of `cost`, which is a function, to a `weight`, which is an attribute of edges.
The following helper function can be used for this purpose:
```
    def costs2attributes(G, cost, attr='weight'):
        for a, b in G.edges():
            G[a][b][attr] = cost(a, b)
```

#### Bonus: native implementation

A suggested implementation of `dijkstra` follows the pseudocode in
[this Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra%27s_algorithm).
Make sure to return a dictionary, where the keys are all target vertices reachable from the source, and their values are paths from the source to the target (i.e. lists of vertices in the order that the shortest path traverses them).


### Visualization

A very simple visualization function is expected in Lab2; we will make it more sophisticated in Lab3.
The function
```
    visualize(graph, view='dot', name='mygraph', nodecolors=None)
```
uses the `graphviz` library, whose documentation can be found [here](https://graphviz.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html).
The first intended use of `nodecolors` is to show the nodes along the shortest path in a different colour.
You can append the following code to your file to demonstrate this:
```
    def view_shortest(G, source, target, cost=lambda u,v: 1):
        path = dijkstra(G, source, cost)[target]['path']
        print(path)
        colormap = {str(v): 'orange' for v in path}
        print(colormap)
        visualize(G, view='view', nodecolors=colormap)

    def demo():
        G = Graph([(1,2),(1,3),(1,4),(3,4),(3,5),(3,6), (3,7), (6,7)])
        view_shortest(G, 2, 6)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        demo()
```


## The task: file `trams.py`

This file needs to import from two other files of your own

- ``graphs.py`` from Lab 2
- ``tramdata.py`` from Lab 1

as well as from the standard libraries ``sys`` and ``json``.
The `sys` library is needed if you have your lab1 solution in a different directory.
Then you need to tell Python where to find the file `tramdata.py`:
```
    import sys
    sys.path.append('../lab1/')
	import tramdata as td
```



### The TramStop class

The class `TramStop` reflects the data stored in the stop dictionary in Lab 1, plus some more information.
It has to store

- the name of the stop
- its position (latitude and longitude)
- the list of lines that serve the stop (not explicit in Lab 1)

Its ``__init__()`` method needs the name as a required argument, whereas the position and line list are optional.
The public methods should enable

- getting the name of the line
- getting and setting the position
- getting the list of lines and adding lines to the list

This time, we leave it to you to decide what methods exactly there are.


### The TramLine class

The class ``TramLine`` reflects exactly the line dictionary of Lab 1.
Thus it should store internally, and make publicly available,

- the name of the line (in Gothenburg usually a number, but do not assume this)
- the list of stops in order, in one direction

The detailed design is left to you.


### The TramNetwork class

The class ``TramNetwork`` is a ``WeightedGraph`` (i.e. inherits from it).
It stores internally

- a dictionary of stops and their positions (objects of class ``TramStop``)
- a dictionary of lines and their stops (objects of class ``TramLine``)
- vertices, which are all the stops
- edges, which are transitions between consecutive stops on some line 
- weights, which are the transition times between adjacent stops

Notice that you need not store geographical distances between stops, because they can be computed from the positions of stops.

Most of the public methods are getters:

- the position of a stop
- the transition time between two subsequent stops
- the geographical distance between any two stops (from Lab 1!)
- list the lines through a stop
- list the stops along a line
- list all stops
- list all lines

However, there is one setter method, which is a bit more tricky:

- remove a line, together with all stops that are only served by that line

This function will be needed in Lab 3 where we want to focus on a subset of lines.


### Reading a TramNetwork

The JSON file `tramnetwork.json` produced in Lab 1 contains all information needed for building an instance of `TramNetwork`.
The function
```
    readTramNetwork(tramfile=TRAM_FILE)
```
should do this, defaulting to `tramnetwork.json`, which should however be given via the variable `TRAM_FILE`.
It should return an object of class ``TramNetwork`.


### Testing trams.py

TODO


## A demo

You can paste the following code to your `trams.py` file to demonstrate and test it:
```
    def demo():
        G = readTramNetwork()
        a, b = input('from,to ').split(',')
        gr.view_shortest(G, a, b)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        demo()
```
When you run the code, it asks you to enter two tram stop names separated by a comma (no spaces between).
Then displays the whole tram network, with the shortest path (as the number of stops) coloured.


### Testing and documentation

Draw a UML diagram covering the classes `TramNetwork`, `TramLine`, `TramStop`,  `WeightedGraph`,  and `Graph`.
You can do this by drawing on a paper and photographing the result, or by using a drawing tool.
The results should be submitted as a PDF file in your Git repository.

Submit the files

- `graphs.py`
- `trams.py`
- `test_graphs.py`
- `test_trams.py`
- `tram_uml.pdf`

via the same Git repository as in Lab 1.
Do this by reporting in Canvas that your lab is ready to be graded.

Also indicate in the message to Canvas if you have done a native implementation or used `networkx`.

Commit message:

added UML diagram, removed task of creting your own

labs/lab2/lab2.md, after:

# Lab2: Graphs and transport networks

Advanced Python Course, Chalmers DAT515, 2021

by Aarne Ranta

DRAFT, TO BE FINALIZED 18 November 2021

## Purpose

The purpose of this lab is to build a system of classes and algorithms for graphs.
The intended application is transport networks, which will be built on top of the graph classes.
But the graphs can be applied in many other ways as well, as will be shown in exercises and extra labs.

The main learning outcomes are:

- Python's data model for classes
- class definitions with private instance variables, public methods, and "hidden" methods
- inheritance between classes
- representations of graphs
- Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm with different cost functions
- visualization of graphs and paths in them, the ``graphviz`` library
- property-based testing with randomized input data, the ``hypothesis`` library


### Bonus points

If you implement graphs and Dijkstra's algorithms from scratch, you can get 4 bonus points on top of the normal 10 points.
But if you want to save work, you can use the ['networkx`] library.
This will require some code to be written, but less than in the implementation from scratch.
Details will be given below.


## The task: overview

You are expected to submit two Python files,

- `graphs.py` implementing general graphs and graph algorithms,
- `trams.py` implementing transport networks by using concepts from `graphs.py`.

The following UML diagram shows the classes that you are expected to implement in these files.

![tram-uml](../images/tram-classes.png)

The underscored variables right after the class names are just a hint that need not be followed.
In fact, the baseline (non-bonus) implementation of `Graph` does not need them at all.
The important thing is that the public methods are implemented with the names given here.

In addition to the classes, you will have to implement the following functions:
```
    # in graphs.py
    dijkstra(graph, source, cost=lambda u,v: 1)
	visualize(graph, view='dot', name='mygraph', nodecolors={}, engine='dot')

    # in trams.py
    readTramNetwork(file='tramnetwork.json)
```
Last but not least, you will have to write tests using `unittest` and `hypothesis` libraries.


## The task: file `graphs.py`

### The Graph class

The class `Graph` can be initialized in two ways:

- from `None` (the default)
- from a list of edges

The class builds internally a data structure that supports different graph operations.
This data structure is kept hidden, and we leave it to everyone to choose among the various equivalent representations.
The public methods to be implemented are:

- `neighbors(vertex)`
- `vertices()`
- `edges()` (only given in one direction for undirected graphs)
- `__len__()`, the number of vertices
- `add_vertex(vertex)`
- `add_edge(vertex, vertex)` 
- `remove_vertex(vertex)` (also removing the edges with this vertex)
- `remove_edge(vertex, vertex)`
- `get_vertex_value(vertex)`
- `set_vertex_value(vertex)`

If you have read an earlier draft of this document, you may notice that we have simplified the specification a bit:

- we only deal with undirected graphs
- we have fewer arguments in initialization 


#### Baseline solution, no bonus points

The simplest way to implement graphs is by inheriting from `networkx.Graph`:
```
    class Graph(nx.Graph):
        def __init__(self, start=None):
            super().__init__(start)
```
The internal representation is inherited from `nx.Graph`, so you don't need to define any hidden variables.

Some of the public methods also exist in `nx.Graph` with exactly the same names.
They need not be defined in your class, since they are inherited.
Some other methods have different names, so that to implement the desired API, you have to write, for example,
```
        def vertices(self):
            return self.nodes()
```
The trickiest part is perhaps the values of vertices.
In `networkx`,  they are stored in dictionaries associated with the vertices themselves.
Here is a minimal example suggesting how you could do to set and get values of nodes:
```
    >>> G = nx.Graph()
    >>> G.add_node(9)
    >>> G.nodes[9]['location'] = 234
    >>> G.nodes[9]
    {'location': 234}
```

#### Native implementation, gives bonus points

If you write a native implementation without using `networkx` (or any other libraries), you need to

- design an internal representation, stored in private instance variables (such as `_adjacencylist`),
- define all the public methods as specified above.


#### Testing your graph implementation

We recommend the use of `hypothesis` in the way specified in the lecture notes, Section 5.9.

A particularly powerful way of testing is available for your native implementation if you also implement the one using `networkx`.
Then you can systematically compare the results of all the public methods.



### The WeightedGraph class

`WeightedGraph` is a subclass of `Graph`, which stores **edge weights**.
These weights can be objects of any type.
The class stores weights internally (e.g. in a dictionary) and supports two public methods:

- `get_weight(vertex, vertex)`
- `set_weight(vertex, vertex, weight)`

If you have chosen the `networkx` implementation of graphs, you can implement these methods by using the representation of weights that is already available:
```
    >>> G = nx.Graph()
    >>> G.add_edge(1,2)
    >>> G[1][2]['weight'] = 8
    >>> G[1][2]['weight']
    8
```
If you use a native implementation, the simplest solution is probably to have a separate dictionary.


### The shortest path algorithm

The function
```
    dijkstra(graph, source, cost=lambda u,v: 1)
```
computes the shortest path from `source` vertex to all other vertices, as a dictionary.
What is shortest is calculated by the minimum sum of ``cost`` function applied to each step on the path.
For example, if `graph` is a `WeightedGraph`, its ``get_weight()`` method can be used.


#### Baseline: Networkx implementation

The [`networkx` implementation](https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.shortest_paths.generic.shortest_path.html#networkx.algorithms.shortest_paths.generic.shortest_path) of Dijkstra's algorithm is the function
```
    shortest_path(graph, source=None, target=None, weight=None, method='dijkstra')
```
which you can call in your own `dijkstra` function.
To do so, you

- pass the `graph` and `source` arguments to `nx.shortest_path`,
- leave out the `target`, which causes the function to produce a dictionary for all targets,
- convert the `cost` function to a `weight` attribute,
- leave out the `method`, so that the default is used.

The tricky part is the conversion of `cost`, which is a function, to a `weight`, which is an attribute of edges.
The following helper function can be used for this purpose:
```
    def costs2attributes(G, cost, attr='weight'):
        for a, b in G.edges():
            G[a][b][attr] = cost(a, b)
```

#### Bonus: native implementation

A suggested implementation of `dijkstra` follows the pseudocode in
[this Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra%27s_algorithm).
Make sure to return a dictionary, where the keys are all target vertices reachable from the source, and their values are paths from the source to the target (i.e. lists of vertices in the order that the shortest path traverses them).


### Visualization

A very simple visualization function is expected in Lab2; we will make it more sophisticated in Lab3.
The function
```
    visualize(graph, view='dot', name='mygraph', nodecolors=None)
```
uses the `graphviz` library, whose documentation can be found [here](https://graphviz.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html).
The first intended use of `nodecolors` is to show the nodes along the shortest path in a different colour.
You can append the following code to your file to demonstrate this:
```
    def view_shortest(G, source, target, cost=lambda u,v: 1):
        path = dijkstra(G, source, cost)[target]['path']
        print(path)
        colormap = {str(v): 'orange' for v in path}
        print(colormap)
        visualize(G, view='view', nodecolors=colormap)

    def demo():
        G = Graph([(1,2),(1,3),(1,4),(3,4),(3,5),(3,6), (3,7), (6,7)])
        view_shortest(G, 2, 6)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        demo()
```


## The task: file `trams.py`

This file needs to import from two other files of your own

- ``graphs.py`` from Lab 2
- ``tramdata.py`` from Lab 1

as well as from the standard libraries ``sys`` and ``json``.
The `sys` library is needed if you have your lab1 solution in a different directory.
Then you need to tell Python where to find the file `tramdata.py`:
```
    import sys
    sys.path.append('../lab1/')
	import tramdata as td
```



### The TramStop class

The class `TramStop` reflects the data stored in the stop dictionary in Lab 1, plus some more information.
It has to store

- the name of the stop
- its position (latitude and longitude)
- the list of lines that serve the stop (not explicit in Lab 1)

Its ``__init__()`` method needs the name as a required argument, whereas the position and line list are optional.
The public methods should enable

- getting the name of the line
- getting and setting the position
- getting the list of lines and adding lines to the list

This time, we leave it to you to decide what methods exactly there are.


### The TramLine class

The class ``TramLine`` reflects exactly the line dictionary of Lab 1.
Thus it should store internally, and make publicly available,

- the name of the line (in Gothenburg usually a number, but do not assume this)
- the list of stops in order, in one direction

The detailed design is left to you.


### The TramNetwork class

The class ``TramNetwork`` is a ``WeightedGraph`` (i.e. inherits from it).
It stores internally

- a dictionary of stops and their positions (objects of class ``TramStop``)
- a dictionary of lines and their stops (objects of class ``TramLine``)
- vertices, which are all the stops
- edges, which are transitions between consecutive stops on some line 
- weights, which are the transition times between adjacent stops

Notice that you need not store geographical distances between stops, because they can be computed from the positions of stops.

Most of the public methods are getters:

- the position of a stop
- the transition time between two subsequent stops
- the geographical distance between any two stops (from Lab 1!)
- list the lines through a stop
- list the stops along a line
- list all stops
- list all lines

However, there is one setter method, which is a bit more tricky:

- remove a line, together with all stops that are only served by that line

This function will be needed in Lab 3 where we want to focus on a subset of lines.


### Reading a TramNetwork

The JSON file `tramnetwork.json` produced in Lab 1 contains all information needed for building an instance of `TramNetwork`.
The function
```
    readTramNetwork(tramfile=TRAM_FILE)
```
should do this, defaulting to `tramnetwork.json`, which should however be given via the variable `TRAM_FILE`.
It should return an object of class ``TramNetwork`.


### Testing trams.py

TODO


## A demo

You can paste the following code to your `trams.py` file to demonstrate and test it:
```
    def demo():
        G = readTramNetwork()
        a, b = input('from,to ').split(',')
        gr.view_shortest(G, a, b)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        demo()
```
When you run the code, it asks you to enter two tram stop names separated by a comma (no spaces between).
Then displays the whole tram network, with the shortest path (as the number of stops) coloured.


### Submission

Submit the files

- `graphs.py`
- `trams.py`
- `test_graphs.py`
- `test_trams.py`

via the same Git repository as in Lab 1.
Do this by reporting in Canvas that your lab is ready to be graded.

Also indicate in the message to Canvas if you have done a native implementation or used `networkx`.
