labs/lab3/peer-review.md, before:

Peer-Review Guidelines
======================

## General description

For Lab 3, each group of students (hereinafter the submitting group) is expected to submit their solution to another group (hereinafter the reviewing group), which will have to assess whether the submission passes or fails.
Each submitting group will submit to a reviewing group **selected by the teaching team** in order to reduce conflicts of interest (matching groups who tackled the same Bonus parts as much as possible).
However, the review process is not blinded.

The groups are paired and will review each other, as such, *submitting* or *reviewing* should be seen as a role that each group will have to endorse.
Each submitted solution must be clear whether any bonus part has been tackled or not.

## Assessment
Each reviewing group have to assess whether the submitted solution is acceptable or not according to the following criteria:

- the web application runs
- it displays the complete map of tram lines
- it is possible to query the shortest path between any two points

Optionally, the reviewing group may have to assess the bonus assignments:
- whether the web application account for changes (Bonus 1)
- whether it is possible to select departures by clicking on any stops (Bonus 2)

These points 3 (+ 2) points will be assessed during a live presentation (physical or online) conducted by the submitting group on their own machines (we do not expect you to run someone else's code).

## Report

The reviewing group must write a short report motivating their decision according the criteria mentioned above.
The report must been submitted as an issue opened on the other group's repository.
In order to open such an issue, you must first invite the other team as collaborators, as explained [here](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/setting-up-and-managing-your-personal-account-on-github/managing-access-to-your-personal-repositories/inviting-collaborators-to-a-personal-repository).

You must mention in this issue the name of which must include the names of the reviewing group (person 1 and person 2 if the group is a pair) and of the submitting group (person 3 and person 4 if the group is a pair) as `name1-surname1_name2-surname2_reporting_name3-surname3_name4-surname4`.

This is the template for the report/issue:

Section 1: Core assignment
- Q1: Does the application run? --> yes/no
- Q2: Does the application display the complete map of tram lines? --> yes/no
- Q3: Is it possible to query shortest path between any two points? --> yes/no
- Q4: Does the application deal with changes correctly? --> yes/no
- Q5: Does the application show current traffic information? --> yes/no


Section 3: Code quality

It must at least include whether:
- code from lab 2 has been properly reused (i.e., in an efficient way without [boilerplate code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boilerplate_code))
- dijkstra has been implemented and used as intended: there is just
  one definition of the function itself, and different distances are
  obtained by just changing the cost function

Section 4: Screenshots
Insert two screenshots: 
- screenshot 1 must present the web application displaying a shortest path between two stops (similar to the one presented in the assignement [here](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/aarneranta/chalmers-advanced-python/blob/main/labs/lab3/examples/show_route.html) but with **different tram stops** than in the example)
- screenshot 2 must present the code of the function `show_shortest()` (the main function required in the core part of the assignment, see [here](https://github.com/aarneranta/chalmers-advanced-python/blob/main/labs/lab3/lab3.md#your-todo-continue-from-here)).

Note that all Sections are **mandatory** in the report.
Section 3 is more open than the other sections, you can write general comments on the optimization of the code and good practices of Object Oriented Programming.

## Deadlines
### Registration

TBA

### Code 
The deadline for the submission of your code is **Dec 17** firm, but you can submit beforehand.

### Report, demonstration, and self-registration

TBA

## Other considerations - resubmission

A TA is ultimately responsible for the validation of the submission, and also has the responsibility to support the reviewing group in their endeavor (typically for edge cases).
Note that a solution will have to be resubmitted if it doesn't pass the peer-review process (as prescribed in Section 1 of the report), a submitting group can apply for resubmission **once**.
The same reviewing group is assigned for the resubmission, as for the TA.
A group reviewing a resubmission can simply add an addendum to their initial report.
The resubmission report must be written **within 1 day (24 hours)** after resubmission (as the structure should already be familiar to the reviewers).

We invite you to self-manage your resubmission on your private time, which includes a new demonstration.

**The deadline for resubmitting the report/issue of lab 3 is Jan 9.**

Commit message:

Update peer-review with 2024 dates and other details

labs/lab3/peer-review.md, after:

Peer-Review Guidelines
======================

## General description

For Lab 3, each group of students (hereinafter the submitting group) is expected to submit their solution to another group (hereinafter the reviewing group), which will have to assess whether the submission passes or fails.
Each submitting group will submit to a reviewing group **selected by the teaching team** in order to reduce conflicts of interest.
The selections are published directly after the 17 December deadline, when we know which groups have submitted their Lab 3.
The review process is not blinded.

The groups are paired and will review each other, as such, *submitting* or *reviewing* should be seen as a role that each group will have to endorse.
Each submitted solution must be clear whether any bonus part has been tackled or not.

## Assessment
Each reviewing group have to assess whether the submitted solution is acceptable or not according to the following criteria:

- the web application runs
- it displays the complete map of tram lines
- it is possible to query the shortest path between any two points
- the web application account for changes
- it is possible to access actual traffic information by clicking on any stop

These five points points will be assessed during a live presentation (physical or online) conducted by the submitting group on their own machines (we do not expect you to run someone else's code).

## Report

The reviewing group must write a short report motivating their decision according the criteria mentioned above.
The report must been submitted as an issue opened on the other group's repository.
In order to open such an issue, you must first invite the other team as collaborators, as explained [here](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/setting-up-and-managing-your-personal-account-on-github/managing-access-to-your-personal-repositories/inviting-collaborators-to-a-personal-repository).

You must mention in this issue the name of which must include the LabGroup number of the reviewing group (number1) and of the group that is reviewed (number2) as `group_<number1>_reviewing_group_<number2>`.

This is the template for the report/issue:

Section 1: Core assignment
- Q1: Does the application run? --> yes/no
- Q2: Does the application display the complete map of tram lines? --> yes/no
- Q3: Is it possible to query shortest path between any two points? --> yes/no
- Q4: Does the application deal with changes correctly? --> yes/no
- Q5: Does the application show current traffic information? --> yes/no


Section 3: Code quality

It must at least include whether:
- code from lab 2 has been properly reused (i.e., in an efficient way without [boilerplate code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boilerplate_code))
- dijkstra has been implemented and used as intended: there is just
  one definition of the function itself, and different distances are
  obtained by just changing the cost function

Section 4: Screenshots
Insert two screenshots: 
- screenshot 1 must present the web application displaying a shortest path between two stops (similar to the one presented in the assignement [here](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/aarneranta/chalmers-advanced-python/blob/main/labs/lab3/examples/show_route.html) but with **different tram stops** than in the example)
- screenshot 2 must present the code of the function `show_shortest()` (the main function required in the core part of the assignment, see [here](https://github.com/aarneranta/chalmers-advanced-python/blob/main/labs/lab3/lab3.md#your-todo-continue-from-here)).

Note that all Sections are **mandatory** in the report.
Section 3 is more open than the other sections, you can write general comments on the optimization of the code and good practices of Object Oriented Programming.

## Deadlines

### Code 
The deadline for the submission of your code is **Dec 17** firm, but you can submit beforehand.

### Report, demonstration, and self-registration

Demonstrations for reviewers are carried out on 18, 19 or 20 December. You can use any of the lab times and rooms scheduled in TimeEdit, as well as GD-salen on the lecture time 18 December. You can also agree on peer reviewing on Zoom or other video meeting platform.

After the reviews, the reports are to be submitted on GitHub classroom, in the same repository as the lab3 solution itself. **You must submit both reports: the one you wrote about the other group, and the one they wrote about you**. This is of course redundant, but it will make the TAs' work much easier, because they only have to look at one repository to see both reports.

## Other considerations - resubmission

A TA is ultimately responsible for the validation of the submission, and also has the responsibility to support the reviewing group in their endeavor (typically for edge cases).
Note that a solution will have to be resubmitted if it doesn't pass the peer-review process (as prescribed in Section 1 of the report), a submitting group can apply for resubmission **once**.
The same reviewing group is assigned for the resubmission, as for the TA.
A group reviewing a resubmission can simply add an addendum to their initial report.
The resubmission report must be written **within 1 day (24 hours)** after resubmission (as the structure should already be familiar to the reviewers).

We invite you to self-manage your resubmission on your private time, which includes a new demonstration.

**The deadline for resubmitting the report/issue of lab 3 is Jan 9.**
