# Exercise 5, Advanced Programming in Python

Chalmers DAT515

Aarne Ranta

2021-12-08

This time, we have just three questions, but they are rather extensive projects.


## Question 1

The Wikipedia article about Gothenburg tram network includes a table with information about the different tram lines:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gothenburg_tram_network#Lines

Your task is to create an HTML table that reconstructs a similar table from an instance of the `TramNetwork` class in Lab 2.
You should write this as a function that works for any instance of this class.
However, it need not give all the information that is found in Wikipedia, but just the information that can be extracted from your data.
Thus the table should have six columns:

- Line (you don't need to add colours)
- Stretch (the endpoints of the line, according to your data)
- Length (computed with geodistance from stop positions; the result can be different from Wikipedia)
- Stops (the number of stops)
- Travel time (computed from your transition times)
- Average speed (length divided by travel time)

You can use the functions from the file [`htmlgen.py`](../../examples/htmlgen.py) and add your own ones as needed.


## Question 2

Write a function that generates a graph of hyperlinks starting from a given URL.
The algorithm is:

1. Fetch the content of the URL (you can assume it is a HTML file).
2. Use this URL as the first node of your graph. It would be natural to use directed graphs, because the link relation goes in one direction.
3. Parse the file to collect all hyperlinks of the form `<a href="<URL>">` where the URL points to an HTML file (see lecture notes 8.1.2 for HTML parsers).
4. Create edges from the first URL to all these URLs.
5. Fetch these files, parse them for hyperlinks, and add these to the graph.
6. Visualize the graph.
7. Demonstrate your function with some URL of your choice.

You could obviously generalize this into a recursive function, which creates a graph for a large part of the web.
So this task may lead to very large graphs, so we stop it with the three layers mentioned.
It could also lead to infinite loops if you are not careful - can you explain how?


## Question 3

Make sure you can build a working application in Django.
Follow the tutorial (Django Girls) and add some functionality of your own.
You can skip the Admin and Deployment parts.




