exercises/ex03/ex03.md, before:

# Exercise 3, Advanced Programming in Python

Chalmers DAT515

Aarne Ranta

2021-11-17

DRAFT, TO BE COMPLETED


## Question 1

Define a function that converts adjacency lists to adjacency matrices and back.
Notice that, in the back conversion, the list of vertices is needed in addition to the matrix.


## Question 2

Define an **equality relation** between lists of edges that represent undirected graphs.
Notice that simply `==` of lists of pairs cannot be trusted, because the edges can appear in different orders, and because also the pairs can come in different orders.
Thus for instance
```
    equal([(1, 2), (2, 3)], [(3, 2), (2, 1)] == True
```

## Question 3

Implement the depth-first search algorithm by using the pseudocode from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search).
Compare it with the breadth-first search, as given during the lecture, by looking at the order of nodes.


## Question 4

Define a representation of graphs that can have multiple edges between vertices.
An example is the tram network, where different tram lines running between two stops are represented as different edges.
Such graphs are known as **multigraphs**.

**Hint**: there is a simple encoding by just using weighted graphs.


## Question 5

Try to implement the `Graph` class of Lab 2 as a subclass of `networkx.Graph`.
In other words, define each of the specified public methods in terms of the methods given in that library.
If successful, this implementation will provide good ways to test your own implementation.
If unsuccessful, it will be interesting to see where you it fails.

Commit message:

finalizing ex03: no changes, just mentioning that Q5 will be postponed

exercises/ex03/ex03.md, after:

# Exercise 3, Advanced Programming in Python

Chalmers DAT515

Aarne Ranta

2021-11-17


## Question 1

Define a function that converts adjacency lists to adjacency matrices and back.
Notice that, in the back conversion, the list of vertices is needed in addition to the matrix.


## Question 2

Define an **equality relation** between lists of edges that represent undirected graphs.
Notice that simply `==` of lists of pairs cannot be trusted, because the edges can appear in different orders, and because also the pairs can come in different orders.
Thus for instance
```
    equal([(1, 2), (2, 3)], [(3, 2), (2, 1)] == True
```

## Question 3

Implement the depth-first search algorithm by using the pseudocode from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search).
Compare it with the breadth-first search, as given during the lecture, by looking at the order of nodes.


## Question 4

Define a representation of graphs that can have multiple edges between vertices.
An example is the tram network, where different tram lines running between two stops are represented as different edges.
Such graphs are known as **multigraphs**.

**Hint**: there is a simple encoding by just using weighted graphs.


## Question 5

*The discussion of this question will be postponed until the next exercise class, 1 December.*

Try to implement the `Graph` class of Lab 2 as a subclass of `networkx.Graph`.
In other words, define each of the specified public methods in terms of the methods given in that library.
If successful, this implementation will provide good ways to test your own implementation.
If unsuccessful, it will be interesting to see where you it fails.
