# Exercise 3, Advanced Programming in Python

Chalmers DAT515

Aarne Ranta

2021-11-17

## Question 1: directory structure

Write a function `dir2dict(path='.')`, which builds a file directory tree with `path` as root, using the representation in lecture notes section 4.3.1.

**Hint**: the easiest way to do this is probably by a recursive function, where `dir2dict()` calls itself with an updated path whenever it encounters a directory.
Test your function with the root directory of your clone of this GitHub repository as `path`.
You can do this by going to that directory and using `.` (the current directory) as path.


## Question 2: graph representations

Define a function that converts adjacency lists to adjacency matrices and back.
Notice that, in the back conversion, the list of vertices is needed in addition to the matrix.


## Question 3: equality between graphs

Define an **equality relation** between lists of edges that represent undirected graphs.
Notice that simply `==` of lists of pairs cannot be trusted, because the edges can appear in different orders, and because also the pairs can come in different orders.
Thus for instance
```
    equal([(1, 2), (2, 3)], [(3, 2), (2, 1)] == True
```

## Question 4: depth-first search

Implement the depth-first search algorithm by using the pseudocode from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search).
Compare it with the breadth-first search, as given during the lecture, by looking at the order of nodes.


## Question 5: multigraphs

Define a representation of graphs that can have multiple edges between vertices.
An example is the tram network, where different tram lines running between two stops are represented as different edges.
Such graphs are known as **multigraphs**.

**Hint**: there is a simple encoding by just using weighted graphs.
