# Exercise 2

Advanced Programming in Python, Chalmers DAT515

Aarne Ranta 2021

## Question 1: reading files into data, step 1

Write a function `tsv2list(FILE)`, which reads a tab-separated file and returns a list of dictionaries, where
- the first line defines the column names,
- the rest of the lines are implemented as dictionaries with these column names as keys
- values that consist in digits are converted to `int` (define a separate function `convert_value()` for this)

This follows the first step of processing in Section 4.2.2 of the [lecture notes](../../python-guide.pdf).

Test your function with the file [`countries.tsv`](./countries.tsv) in
this directory.

**Hint**: the list function `zip()` can be useful for pairing labels with values.


## Question 2: reading files into data, step 2

Generalize the function from Question 1 to `tsv2dict(FILE, key=None)`, where `key` is used as follows:

- if it is `None`, the function works as in Question 1;
- if it is some of the keys (from the first line of the file), the function returns a dictionary with the values of that key as keys, and shorter dictionaries with the other columns as values, as in the second step of Section 4.2.2;
- when doing this perform the following checks of data soundness:
  - if the `key` does not exist on the first line of the file, report an error;
  - if an already existing value is overwritten, report an error. In this case, the key is not really a **key** in the normal database sense, in which all keys should have unique values.

Test your function again with the file [`countries.tsv`](./countries.tsv) in this directory.
To test the error checking, first use some non-existing key, e.g. `president`,  then some non-unique attribute, e.g. `currency`.


## Question 3: writing JSON files

Write a function `data2json(data, FILE)` that writes a Python object to a JSON file `FILE`.
This function is almost totally given in the lecture notes.
So just test it with the results of functions in Questions 1 and 2.
Then read the files back into Python objects, and compare these objects with the original ones.
Wrap all this in a function `test_json_data(FILE, key=None)` function, which returns the result of the test.


## Question 4: writing formatted text files

Write a function `data2txt(data)` that prints labelled list data (from Question 1) as a nicely formatted text, where the width of each column is the maximum width of values in that column plus 2 (see lecture notes, section 3.7.1).


## Question 5: querying JSON data

Write a function `query_test()` that builds a dictionary with `tsv2dict('countries.tsv', key='country')` and answers the following queries:

- How many countries are there?
- What is the most common name of a currency?
- Which two countries have the smallest difference in population?
- List the 20 countries with the highest population density (population divided by area), together with the densities, in a descending order of density.


The answers can be just printed; print the question before each result.
Use comprehensions if possible, otherwise loops.
You can even compare these two methods to get practice.
